So hello everyone.

Welcome to the Twitter town hall of the open source

AI definition.

And today we're going to go very quickly over the

slides and then we're going to have a dialogue with

Sam and Gerardo.

So why we need to define open source AI now?

This is a big topic.

AI has been on the media.

And there's a lot going on regulation in the US

in Europe and a lot of companies are claiming they're

open. They're releasing open source AI when there might not

be the facts.

We do need a definition.

This is not a new content.

I don't mind if you just click through them.

If you want.

It's just mostly just to get them like I say,

see if there's any new content and get them on

the record and get them out there.

Alright, yeah, so I'll go very quickly here.

So here are the benefits of open source AI by

Leah from the Digital Public Goods Alliance, mostly around

transparency and safety, market, the concentration and AI

polyculture and diverse application.

So the whole process of defining open source AI at the OSI

started in 2022 and this started with interviews.

That was, we created a podcast and a panel with experts.

Later we have webinars, a webinar series.

And so.

This was really important for us to reach this point,

right? Where we created the definition.

Well, in late 2023, we had the co-design process led by Mair.

So we hired Mair.

She's independent, so she has no influence over the results regarding

sponsorships and et cetera.

And she really did her work as independent as possible.

She organized several activities online and in person as well.

And we had several questions that we wanted to answer.

So the first question was, what should this open source

principles mean for artificial intelligence?

So the principles would be used to use to study,

modify and to share.

And so during this, the first, I would say the first months,

we changed the four freedoms of software and we adapted that to AI.

And we came up with these four freedoms.

Now, the second question was, what components must be open in order

for an AI system to be used, studied, modified and shared?

So we used the MOF framework, the model open framework created by the Linux

Foundation as the list of components.

And for each one, we evaluated the four freedoms, right?

We created four working groups, Yamachu, Bloom, Pythia and OpenCV.

And we started outreach to bring people to join

those working groups.

Each working group, they had a discussion.

I believe the discussions were for several sessions.

It was not just one session where they.

They didn't actually find a consensus, so they actually voted.

And after voting, after every work group voted,

there was a compilation of those votes.

A publication of reports and that led to the definition.

It's worth highlighting here as well that one of the working groups,

Yamachu, they were able to cast negative votes.

And this the reason for that was that was supposed to happen with every working group.

But it seems it was too complicated.

So that was dropped after Yama cast a negative vote.

So that was the reason for that.

And then we started to work with the other working groups.

Thank you.

