Welcome everyone to our town hall. We're actually going to start having these town halls every week

until the OSAID is launched on October 28th. So we'll be seeing more of you. These are the

community agreements which you're familiar with if you've been here before. One mic, one speaker,

so allow one person to speak at a time, to take space, make space, if you tend to talk more,

pause to let others share, if you tend not to share we invite you to speak up and share your

opinions, to be kind to each other, just not acknowledging that the work is hard, but we can

still be gentle with each other. Obviously hate speech is not permitted in the meeting, that

hopefully is not a surprise, that we're trying to move forward, obviously, that obstacles are marked

to be discussed, but that we try to continue to make progress even when we find those, oh

Nick, I am seeing my whole slide, it's okay, that we seek solutions,

just because there are so many ways that this could not work and finding those ways that this

can work is needed. Does anyone have any other community agreements that they'd like us to

use as we conduct this meeting? You can share it in the chat.

Drinking a bubbly water, okay. Thank you Nick. So we're on version 0.0.9 which was released at

the end of last month, if you use that QR code you can view it online, I believe this is the

HackMD instance with the commenting function, and I'll go through that now. Next. Yeah, so the

OpenSource AI definition has two parts in addition to the preamble, it affirms the four freedoms

as initially enunciated by the Free Software Foundation, but now applied to AI systems, so

grants the freedom to use the system for any purpose without asking permission, to study the

system and inspect its components, to modify the system for any purpose, including to change its

output, and to share the system again with or without modification and for any purpose.

Next. And then the second part of the definition is the preferred form

to make modifications, and again this is for machine learning, OpenSource AI system, right,

so the technology is part of what defines the preferred form, the particular methodology.

So first it requires open weights, so that's model weights and parameters, requires open code,

which means source code used to train and run the system, and it requires data information,

which is the data set or detailed information about the data used to train the system,

and that actually we should change that particular way we're phrasing that,

because the detailed information about the data used to train and run the system is required,

whether or not a data set is also required. Okay, thank you. So what is next, September and

October? We're resolving the comments. We intended to release our RC1 this week. It is still being

edited for reasons some of you may have heard the conversation is having with Gerardo, but there's

still some edits being made to RC1, the release candidate one. Our goal is that we will launch

that next week though, at the Nerdeala conference in Argentina, and then we will have a staple

version launched at All Things Open on October 8th, 28th at the end of next month. Next.

And also just so you know the requirements that we have internally for this launch,

that the board requires that the open source AI definition or OSAID be supported by diverse

stakeholders and specifically for stakeholder types, end users, deployers, developers, and

subjects. So I think in this slide there are not definitions of that, but we can define that if

there's interest, and that that be global representation. Secondly, that there are real

life examples of these AI systems, so it is not, the definition does not result in an empty set.

And finally, that we are able to complete this process by that

deadline that I gave previously of the end of October. Next.

So this is just to let you know where we are. We're in September.

We have done a lot of, we and actually our partners, have done a lot of sharing

the OSAID internationally this month. We had Rahmat, who is a organizational endorser,

which I'll talk about later, and co-designer presented the OSAID in Dakar at the Deep Learning

in Dhaba. We had Taranima Prabhakar, who's a, I'd say a friend, a friend of the OSAID,

and the founder of Taddle, an open source AI system, presented at FOSS India in Bangalore.

I presented in the US at Regen AI, Ashland's in the state of Oregon.

Stefano presented the OSAID in Vienna at Lung's Foundation Europe, and then I will,

inshallah, present in Buenos Aires next week at NERD-ER-LA. And then next week, next month, we

will present at All Things Open, which is in Raleigh, and then we have a data workshop, which

will, which is a data policy paper that deals with, I would say, data questions emerging from the

open source AI definition, but is not specifically working on the definition,

and that will generate a white paper. Okay, yes, get involved. So the big ask,

do you want to do the ask, Nick, the endorse the OSAID ask, because you did, you did this web form.

So do you want to do it, or shall I? Yes, so right now, if you join the website,

and if you look under the drafts, there's a form now for endorsements. So if you'd like to join

that, and I'll paste the link here as well to the form, you can endorse that either as an individual

or as an organization. So let me just drop the link to the form, and it's very simple. You just

add your name, your role, your institution, and if you're endorsing this as an individual or

as an institution, or both, that's an option as well. You can add your comments, and once we

are going to be releasing this, the new release candidates, we'll also showcase some quotes,

and if you add a message there, that should appear as well. Thanks so much. Next slide.

So this is also just sharing with you the definition, and well, you can go back to that

colorful one. Okay, well, they, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, yeah. So basically, just to say this is a call,

another call for public participation, that anyone who is on the web and would like to endorse the

OSAID is welcome to do so. We do, as Nick said, have the option for organizations to endorse the

OSAID, which is in a more formal process, but also any individual can choose to endorse the OSAID,

and what that means is that when we do have our official launch in October, that your name and

affiliation will be listed on the landing page as an endorser, kind of like the signature at

the end of a document. So, yes, thank you. Next. Hi. So I think that gave, yeah, I think that

gave that information that I was just describing. We can put it up in text still, go back. Some

people like to read as well as to hear information. Could you go back to that previous slide, Nick?

Thank you. Yeah, so this is just affirming that there's individual and organizational,

and it's clarifying what endorsement means, which is that your name is going on, it says

your press release, but it's a public statement that will be on our website, announcing the OSAID,

the web form, and then you can email or DM Nick or I if you have any questions about this,

in addition to the Q&A we're about to have. Now we can go on to the final slide.

Yep, so that's our request. We would love your endorsement of the OSAID,

and to participate in our public forum, which has always been available, and attend weekly town

halls are the ways to currently participate in the process, and that QR code is to the forum,

I believe. So if you go to the next slide.

I will open it up to Q&A, and please, please raise your hand, and I or Nick will call on you,

and allowing everyone to have a comment before we have double up on comments from any one person,

and you can also text in the chat if you would like to do that instead of speaking aloud.

But yeah, I would love to have your comments and questions.

All right.

All right. Hello, or Nick, are there any comments or questions that you feel might be interesting

for us to talk through? Is there anything, anything that I can clarify?

I know that you're going to be talking about the OSAID, and I'm going to be talking about

the OSAID, and I'm going to be talking about the OSAID, and I'm going to be talking about

the OSAID, and I'm going to be talking about the OSAID, and I'm going to be talking about the OSAID,

and I'm going to be talking about the OSAID, and I'm going to be talking about the OSAID,

and I'm going to be talking about the OSAID, and I'm going to be talking about the OSAID,

and I'm going to be talking about the OSAID, and I'm going to be talking about the OSAID,

and I'm going to be talking about the OSAID, and I'm going to be talking about the OSAID,

and I'm going to be talking about the OSAID, and I'm going to be talking about the OSAID,

and I'm going to be talking about the OSAID, and I'm going to be talking about the OSAID,

and I'm going to be talking about the OSAID, and I'm going to be talking about the OSAID,

and I'm going to be talking about the OSAID, and I'm going to be talking about the OSAID,

and I'm going to be talking about the OSAID, and I'm going to be talking about the OSAID.

And I'm going to be talking about the OSAID.

