I don't... oh now it's being recorded. Okay. Yeah. Okay. So now we're being recorded.

This is the Q&A session for those who are watching the recording. The

presentation has already occurred. Yeah. Sounds good. Nick. Nick is commenting. He's

going to record the Q&A. I believe Stefano will be in Vienna. I do not know

if there will be a workshop or session on the OSAID, but I think Stefano will

be in Vienna personally. Yeah. It's not on my official list, but Nick maybe you have

some information about that. Oh he will be presenting, but not giving a workshop.

Okay. Thanks Nick. All right. Oh okay. Yeah. She and I presented today as I

mentioned earlier. I don't know if people in the recording can see the chat, but

we're just saying that Stefano is going to present with Annie Lai of the Linux

Foundation in Vienna. Yeah. I'll hang out here at least till the half hour to chat

with him, but the formal program has ended.

And Nick will also hang out.

You're welcome.

Ah could I share a bit about my presentation in Hong Kong? Yeah. So it was

those slides that you all saw. I guess it's not I can go back so it's in the

recording, but these are the slides. This is what it what it was called unveiling

the future nurturing openness in AI development, which was Annie's creation.

And Annie talked about the Linux Foundation generative AI Commons

projects, the model openness framework, and the model openness tool. And then I

spoke about the OSAID and specifically talked about not only version 0.0.9

which you saw, but I also spoke about the co-design process both creating the

for freedoms for open source AI and also identifying the required

components using our virtual work groups. And that's been covered in past

workshops. But that was the that was what I presented in Hong Kong. And then

Stefano was also there and so he participated in the Q&A and that was

great. What was the questions? I think there was there was a question about AU

policy and the feasibility of implementation. And then there was a

question in Chinese and Annie fortunately speaks Chinese. And I believe it was

about there were two. One was about the legal implications of the definition. And

the second question was about just asking for why why use open source AI?

Why make a system open source? And so Annie reiterated the benefits of openness

for AI. So yeah.

Oh, loss of connection.

I think I'm still I can still see you chatting. Okay. It said I had lost

internet. Okay. Early impressions on the new, so I'm just going to read Martin's

comment. My early impressions on the new data requirements in 0.0.9 have been good.

Okay. It seems to do the best with a complex situation. We'll keep thinking

about any loopholes. Thank you, Martin. That is basically what we have also

found is this is a compromise. There are people that wish that the definition

were more stringent and there are people that wish it were looser. So there's pull

on both ends. But that's probably some symptom of a compromise. So yeah. I'm

glad that you're seeing that too.

Okay. If training data had been required, how many models would have met that? Yes.

So I think there would have been a few. I think Olmo I think might have met it. I

think the concern was about the legality of the data that there is a risk of

lawsuits or of the data being legally shareable in certain jurisdictions but

not others. And that we wanted to have a definition that would have a global

could be implemented globally and that systems wouldn't be hung up on or be on

possible legal actions. So that is my understanding. And Nick, feel free to

yeah there you go. Olmo and Pythia. Yes. Right. Yes. Yes. So there's a nice forum

post about yeah I could try to find it that talks about the legal

uncertainties of training data and how that could make it helpful to people who

want access to AI open source AI systems to simply pull that X factor out of the

requirements.

See if I can find those.

Maybe. I don't think no it's not something that I wrote. I think it was I

was something in June. Anyway I was reading it this morning. Oh yes

explaining the concept of data information I think it might have been

that one.

Yeah so yeah this is some someone called Sen Ficon. People can be pseudonymous

in the forum but it's just I'll just copy and paste it. It just felt very

clear and well written. This is just a part of that person's post. And that's

the link.

It might be Felix. I don't know. Could be.

Oh great. Thank you. Thank you to Felix. I've actually heard about Felix and

didn't know that this was what he'd written. But yeah it's very good. Very

well put. What else? What are people thinking about? Anyone to chat about?

So there are a couple folks. Maybe not both. There's at least one person on the

call who is from META but I won't ask them to represent that affiliation

unless they want to. But so the answer is yes they're on the call today. And if

that person wants to say anything they're welcome to but they don't have

to say anything if they don't want to.

Mm-hmm yeah for future LLAMA models. Yep. Yep. Do you want to ask? Yeah you can put

the question out there and the person can answer or not. I imagine it's

something they're discussing internally.

Yeah anyone who hasn't asked a question or participated in the chat.

Ralph or DB, Gerardo,

Toka.

Yes Nick that's yeah that's correct. Yeah the current

version of LLAMA does not meet those but they could in the future.

That would be great.

I see Martin is typing. Nick.

I guess is everyone else who's still on the call

is there anything else that you'd like

to me to cover? Anything else you'd like me to talk about?

Nick is just writing a clear definition will help organizations

to make a choice as to whether they want to release an AI system

as an open source AI or not. Okay yeah.

Okay Martin is saying hoping if any indications made about

if in desiring to conform but it sees not yet and it's obviously

fine. Yeah I imagine it's their conversations happening internally.

Releasing smaller models that do miss the OSAID.

That's one option. Yep.

Yep.

Yes that's well put. Nick is saying a clear definition will help guide

policymakers around the world and that was

the reason that we started this in the first place. I actually wasn't even

there in the beginning. Nick was there and Stefano was there.

The board was there but yeah that was the goal for doing this is to have

something clear that policymakers can rely on globally like the

open source definition currently. Yes and the EU AI Act is

is one clear application of this work.

Okay I see people dropping off which is fine. I think I will do a last

call for questions or comments.

And then

okay

Oh you posted on the forum. Kitty I'll post on the forum.

Okay discussing a forum post.

I'm not sure if folks have read it. I would say ideally

this is your opportunity to click on that link that Kitty has

just shared and take a read and comment

on his post. I think that's probably the thing to do.

Yes and thank you for participating in the forum.

Thank you.

All right I think let's call it Nick. Yes beautiful perfect.

Yes Nick has just dropped the link to the

forum and I guess we can turn off the recording and

Nick if you could hang out for a minute I just wanted to ask you something.

