So, first of all, let me introduce myself.

My name is Nick Vidal.

I'm the community manager at the OSI, the Open Source Initiative.

And every two weeks, we organize a public town hall about the open source AI definition.

The goal of this town hall is to give updates and news about what has been happening with

the definition and also to hear your feedback and see how we can make it better.

So let's jump to the rules, right?

What are some agreements that we have here?

I think we can all be very open and very kind.

The idea here, even though if we have any differences, we can agree to disagree.

And so this is especially important when I open space for questions.

You're free to ask any questions and I'll be happy to answer them as best as possible.

So let's talk about the open source AI definition and where we are.

We have been at version 0.0.8 for quite some time right now.

And the reason for that is that we received a lot of feedback and we are working those

details because the next one, the next version will be something much more stable and really

with very few changes going forward.

So the current definition, what we have right now is we have the preamble, we have the four

freedoms and a checklist.

Now what are we working for version 0.0.9?

There are going to be some significant changes based on this feedback and we're about to

release version 0.0.9.

It's just a matter of a final approval.

And we still have the preamble and we try to clarify who are the recipients of the freedoms.

We also have the what's open source AI and we clarify those four freedoms.

As you know, we have the freedom to use, to study, to modify and to share the system.

And for those who know, who have some background on the history of free software and open source,

you know very well that those four freedoms are from the free software definition.

And this has been very stable.

We have been using those four freedoms as the basis throughout most of the moment.

Now one observation that we're also making is that we are underlining that components

and systems must be free from encumbrances that prevent any developer, deployer or user

from exercising those freedoms.

So this is something that we highlighted for this version as well.

And now we made some substantial changes to the preferred form to make modifications to

machine learning systems.

And the reason why we did that, we received a lot of feedback and we wanted to really

make this as precise as possible.

So we added the definitions, right?

Also there's the question of OSD compliance and OSD conformance for each one of those

requirements, right?

And also the legal requirements for each components.

So we made this text here, the preferred form, clearer for us to understand.

And now this is a big one.

Since the definition is going to be something very stable, we cannot make, we shouldn't

make many changes with every version.

We want to have something very solid.

So this, the definition itself should not change much.

However, we know that the technologies are evolving very rapidly and there might be some

changes to the legal framework or to each one of those components.

And so what we're doing for 0.0.9 is actually we're going to make the checklist as a separate

document because the definition is going to be stable.

And the checklist, we might have some smaller changes, of course, but it's going to evolve,

right?

And I wanted to highlight that we use as the list of components, the model openness

framework.

This is something that was created by the Linux Foundation and they have 17 components

and we're using that as a basis, right?

For the checklist.

Now we are currently validating the open source CI definition, looking at several models.

Right now we're looking at Arctic, Bloom, Falcon, Grok, Yamachu, LLM360, Mistral, Oumu,

OpenCV, Fitu, Pythia, T5, and also I believe Vykan, we added that as well.

So the idea behind this is we are looking at the open source CI definition and looking

at the different models and different AI systems that exist.

And we are matching that, looking at the checklist and seeing if those systems are in fact, if

they achieve this, right?

If the open source CI definition applies well to them and we're validating this.

And so as part of this validation updates, here are the current results so far.

So looking at Arctic, for example, this is a large language model by Snowflake and it's

actually pretty good.

It's pretty open.

And we are looking at those different systems and for Arctic, we believe that it's expected

that it does, yes, fulfill the open source CI definition, all the checklists.

So it's very likely that Arctic is an open source AI, right?

Now we have other systems which can be a bit more challenging, right?

So Bloom, Bloom is regarded as an open model by some, but at the same time, they use Rail,

which is very restrictive.

It does not match the open source CI definition on that regard.

And if we look at all other models as well, we see that a few of them, the ones that we

expect to actually be considered open, in fact, they are, they are validating.

So for example, Omo, it's a very open and it's likely that it meets the open source

CI definition requirements.

And AlphaBifia, it's a confirmed yes right now.

So this validation process is important, right?

Now this, what's next?

What's the timeline?

What's happening?

We have this validation phase.

We are looking at the comments.

We're about to release version 0.0.9 after this validation.

We want to have a release candidate.

Also there's a guidance from the board and this is really important.

So the board has three requirements, right, for this definition.

It has to be supported by diverse stakeholders, right?

Also it must provide real life examples.

We don't want a definition that there's no AI system that actually matches that.

So it's important for us to have this, at least a few cases where those AI systems match

the open source CI definition.

They fulfill the open source CI definition.

And we really want to have this stable version by October, at all things open, where we're

going to be announcing this.

So we have this, this restriction on time.

We cannot just go on for this forever.

In fact, a lot of, there's a lot going on around policies and legislation around the

world.

And a definition, a clear definition really is really important.

So we're trying to run against the clock, right?

Basically this is a timeline throughout this past month, we've been attending several events

worldwide.

So July, right now we were in New York City for an event called Auspice for Good that

happened in the United Nations headquarters in New York.

And we also participated in Sustain Africa.

August is coming up.

We're still going to organize those online events, especially because not everyone can

travel, right?

And this makes it more accessible.

But we're going to attend AI Dev in Hong Kong.

This is an event by the Linux Foundation.

We're going to give a talk there.

We're also going to be in Northern Ireland, Buenos Aires.

So we want to make sure that we keep AI Dev will happen in Hong Kong, in Asia.

Northern Ireland, in Buenos Aires, in Latin America.

We just came from an event in New York.

So we really try to make this as representative as possible.

We're trying to organize an in-person event in Africa as well.

And I think we're finalizing that as well.

So we're trying to make the events as accessible as possible by making it online, but also

in-person events and representative of the whole world, right?

For October, then we have the All Things Open events, an important event around open source.

And by then, we hope to announce the stable version of the definition.

Also there's an event, a very small meeting around data.

But this is, we've been gathering mostly nonprofit organizations to be part of this meeting.

It's really small and it's fully booked.

So apologies if we cannot open it up more.

We will try to organize other events as well and invite people to be part of that.

This is the list of some events that have been happening these past months.

We were also in France for OW2.

And so you can see the dates here.

And this in-person events, they have been important.

We have been able to hear a lot of good feedback from everyone and really try to come up with

a definition that it has a lot of backing from people, right?

And so I would like to invite you to participate at these events, the events in person as well.

Also the public forum, you can go to discuss.opensource.org and comments on the drafts or any other topic

that you like to understand.

It's totally free.

You can join.

You don't have to join as an OSI paying member.

You can join as a free member as well.

And you have an access to the forum.

We're going to continue organizing this biweekly virtual townhouse.

And here is an opportunity for you to ask questions and try to understand what's really

happening, right?

Invite you if you want to volunteer for the validation process.

I believe right now it's the working groups are closed, but you can still email us to

know if there's still an opportunity.

And that's it.

So right now I'm going to open up spaces for questions and answers.

You can either ask questions on chats, if you have your microphone option open as well,

you can ask that question live.

And I'm available to answer your questions as best as I can.

>> I have a quick question.

Do you think there are only a few people on this call because there's not a release of

the .9 to discuss or sort of is that why this call is so quiet?

>> Yes.

So this is our 13th townhouse.

And so it has been we do this every two weeks.

And I think right now there's a high expectation for version 0.0.9.

We've been discussing 0.0.8 for quite some time right now.

And I think most of the questions around this version have been answered.

So people are really expecting a new version.

And highly so.

So are we.

We're just waiting for a final decision from the board to release the version.

I expect that we're going to have more questions around that.

>> Okay.

I have another question.

What about the events in Hong Kong and Buenos Aires?

Are there going to be more discussions, like presentations or more discussions or are they

panels?

Can you tell me any more about what's planned specifically for Hong Kong?

>> Of course.

Yeah.

For AI Dev Hong Kong, we're going to have a talk from Mare Joyce, who is the facilitator

of the open source AI definition.

And also from Annie Lai, who is the chair of the Linux Foundation AI and Data.

So they're going to give this talk.

And I believe they're also going to be available for any discussions.

I don't think we have a panel there.

Now for Buenos Aires, for Nerdiarla, there's going to be I see that there's a yes.

So we're going to have a presentation by Mare Joyce and staff.

And are we going to have a panel there or a I believe we're going to have a workshop

as well.

This is being confirmed right now by Holo, who is organizing this.

Yeah.

We're going to have a workshop as well.

It's very likely we're going to have a workshop there.

And it's this event in Buenos Aires is pretty huge.

It's 10,000 participants.

And very well organized events.

So I highly recommend it as well.

Anyone has any other questions?

Of course.

Yeah.

So let me share the link here.

Oh, thanks, Holo.

Holo has already added that.

In fact, Holo is one of the organizers of the events.

The leading organizer.

If you'd like to reach out to him directly, Holo, maybe if you could base your email

or all right.

Yeah.

Feel free to reach out to Holo regarding the events.

All right.

So if there are no other questions, this is going to be made available, the slides and

the recording.

I'm going to be basing this on the forum.

And thank you so much.

We really appreciate it.

And we look forward to your feedback on the forum as well.

All right?

Have a great weekend.

Bye bye.

Bye bye.

Bye bye.

